# Transcript — Speculations about the Future of Mathematics

**Speaker:** Richard Southwell (category-theory educator; author of *Categories and Toposes: Visualized and Explained*)
**Source:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l619jN5wkJA
**Captured:** 2026-06-11 · auto-captions (English), de-duplicated and cleaned
**Companion to:** [graphical-linear-algebra-kidlisp-study.md](graphical-linear-algebra-kidlisp-study.md)

> Source material for the GLA × KidLisp study. The talk is improvised and unedited; it pitches two "future of math" programs — Graphical Linear Algebra (rigorous) and Wildberger box arithmetic (speculative/ultrafinitist). See §6 of the study for the calibration between them.

---

All right. Hello, everybody. Normally, the first thing I say in my video is that I've been looking forward to making this video for a long time, and it's not true this time. This is a kind of improvisational video I'm making. Um because I haven't done any videos for quite a long time, and I was kind of getting a bit frustrated with myself for being like a perfectionist and for like I have a lot of ideas, but I'm not I'm not um I'm being actually releasing them. So, I'm just going to make this unedited, put it out on my main channel, and what am I going to talk about? Well, what I want to talk about is basically some developments in maths that I think are going to have a huge impact in the future. Some of them you might have heard about if you're following this channel. Some of them you might not. Um So, basically, um to cut a long story short, I'm into category theory. I'm into a lot of different kinds of maths, and I'm becoming increasingly aware that there are methods and ways of thinking about these structures which are so visual that I think they're going to lead to a revolution in our society, actually. I mean, I think we're in the middle, actually, of some very, very interesting changes in in society, and I'm actually quite optimistic about it. and I think that one of the most important things about this is that our mathematics is sort of changing from this sort of algebraic um sort of style of maths, you know, this kind of thing, to something more like this, you know? where we can draw these sort of diagrams and instead of having to write a lot of algebra all the time, which essentially is just an encoding. I mean, I I liken this to sheet music, you know, as opposed to this, which is the actual music. I mean, this is what our visual cortex can process. This is you know, I mean, maybe I'm I'm more like this, but to me, um things like, you know, I've got I've I've got so many of these sort of shapes around the house because it's like this is much more meaningful to me than than this, you know? This is something that I can see and visualize and it's I feel feel like it's the visual aspect of maths is closer to the truth of it in some way. Um but I feel like this is also probably an aesthetic kind of thing and it's very interesting these days. We've got these sort of large language models and things like this and AI things on the frontier, which probably won't be thinking about things in such a visual way. They probably won't be as biased as us humans. So, I'm not really trying to make a mathematical statement. I'm trying to make a sort of aesthetic statement. I like things like this more than things like this. And I think that actually most people do. Um and I think that most people have a much easier time that with stuff like this, especially people who haven't been like formally trained for years and years in mathematics. I think that we spend ages and ages learning to manipulate things like this because there are definite advantages as well as disadvantages. Um but that's how it is. Anyway, I'm I'm getting I'm getting myself distracted. Let's get into the actual stuff. So, what are the two things I want want talk about. Well, I don't really like the name of this so much, but I do very much like the subject of graphical linear algebra. Why I like name? Well, because it's not really algebra. I mean, it is graphical, right? It's a it's sort of graphical replacement for linear algebra in a sense. Um and also, I don't know. I I kind of feel like linear algebra is it's such an important subject, but it yeah, it's just for me it's such a encoded subject in the way that it's normally taught that I would almost like this to be called something completely different because it it just gives it it allows you to talk about that stuff, but without any of the algebra. So, I don't know. I just I always try and think about these names of stuff from the perspective of someone who's not into mathematics, you know? For example, um you know, imagine this you're sitting next to someone on the bus and they say, "Oh, well, what what kind of um maths are you into?" And you say, "Oh, well, I'm I like doing graphical linear algebra." And they'll be like, "Linear algebra? What the heck is that? Algebra? I I had a hard time with algebra." But, you know, if you say, "Oh, I I'm doing string diagrams." And you sort of draw a picture like this. Well, they'll be like, "Okay, I understand that." And you say, "Okay, well, you know, a number flows in here and then this black dot means it gets copied. So, if you put a three in, then you've got a three there and a three there. And this white node means that you add things. So, then two signals come in and you get a six out." And they'll be like, "Okay, I understand. You've got a copy and you've got an add." And it's just like, you know, circuits or this, you know, almost you can think about things like water flowing. Um and we can draw these sort of pictures and people I think they get it, you know, they get the idea that information can flow in. Maybe you can copy something and it goes here and then you copy again, you've got three copies of what you put in. And I think that our our visual cortex processes these things really well. And And so some people say, well, this is just a replacement for linear algebra for people that aren't very good at algebra. And I think that this really misses the point. Like because &gt;&gt; [sighs] &gt;&gt; I think that if you're interested in like uh if you if you want to if you're really really interested in maths, you probably ought to understand what these string diagrams are all the way down to understanding them in terms of category theory and how to translate between that and the regular approach to linear algebra. And once you get that, I reckon, you know, I mean, tell me afterwards, like did it help you understand linear algebra cuz it sure as heck helped me. Like I felt like I never understood very much about linear algebra until I started looking at these diagrams for a long time. And um like I feel like I understand it like maybe three times better than I did before because I have now this visual way of of looking at it and it's not really a replacement of the old linear algebra and it's not and this isn't Well, sorry, I said that wrong. It's not really a replacement of linear algebra as much as it's Hm, how can I say this? I think that the truth of it is that we didn't find the proper foundations of mathematics within the last 100 years. Um and I think that stuff like these graphical formalisms and the fact that it's so easy and visual um is a kind of indicator. Like, not evidence exactly, but it's sort of quasi evidence that, well, we're not really looking at things the right way. Um or we didn't really look at things the right way over the last 100 years when we say, "Okay, what's the right approach to linear algebra?" Well, we've got sort of vector space. Um and that's some abstract thing with some abstract definition. Then we've got this idea of linear maps, and it's all very abstract and Bourbaki encoded. And everything else. Um you know, in theory something like that could have had the right foundations, maybe. Even so, I would say it's not really the right way to think about math because it's all encoded. And quite frankly another thing that I'm trying not to say, but I I I should say it actually, is that I'm getting a bit frustrated with the elitism of the mathematical community, really. And I kind of feel like not not everyone in the community is like this, but I mean I was talking with um I I visited a um local math department the other day, and um you know the the change where the math department was. And now it's above the computer science department. And the guy I was talking with is like, "Yeah, rightly so, you know." And maybe that's not rightly so. I mean there's a tremendous amount of arrogance among people who some people who, you know, have mastered things like things like this, you know. Um they can solve things like that in their head, and they they know all about um kind of Lie theory and um topological manifolds and all sorts of things in a very algebraic way, and they think, well, I I know how to I know how [snorts] to think about all this stuff. Most people don't. I'm aware of all of the structure that most people aren't. Therefore, like, you know, they walk into rooms and just think that they understand pretty much everything better than everyone else. And I think that this is this is a really I think it's it's actually a really bad thing to think. Like, number one, because it's just not true. I mean, quite frankly um one of the things I've been blessed with in life, really, is even though I've had quite a lot of mathematical ability, I've been blessed with knowing a lot of people who are not into maths, who are a lot smarter than me. that's really helped me to see that, yeah, okay, we we might be able to solve these things in our head. We might, you know, memorize the quadratic formula and you know, memorize the definition of a kind extension and all of this kind of stuff, but that really is not the same as having a sort of embodied real understanding of the world. Or, you know, um and it's and I also think that really intelligence is not like a one-dimensional thing at all. And I think there's a lot of people who are very skewed into maths, and they kind of think, well, you know, what would what would a sort of um you know, person of type X know about about, you know, whatever. Like, for example, economics, right? Or how to how to govern a country, or how to, you know, how to regulate something, or how to make some kind of system which is going to I mean, I think there's a tremendous amount of arrogance currently in this sort of technique technique &gt;&gt; I mean I think we do have responsibility if we if we know a lot of maths. I mean I'm I'm starting to starting to realize this more and more that I think we do have a responsibility actually um to to sort of if we can make sure that we're thinking about these things and using them in a in the right kind of way or as much as we can to try to be Yeah, anyway, I'm not trying to turn this into a into a moral lecture. Let's Let's get on to some other stuff. So, yeah, graphical linear algebra. So, what is graphical linear algebra? Well um I'll give you a sort of 5-minute intro to it. I've got other videos where I talk about this much more, but really in a sense even more special than graphical linear algebra is the idea of a graph, okay? And I haven't really made that many videos on graph theory. A graph is just a load of dots and some lines connecting them. That's a graph. And it's the same we consider it to be the same as this graph here because we don't really care exactly how things are laid out. We're only interested in how things are connected together. So graph theory is the theory of these kind of structures. These are called undirected graphs because these are just lines, but there's also sort of directed graphs. And in a way they're a bit more general. I mean, you know, we can have just an arrow going in one direction and not both. You can see that they're sort of more general structures because we can kind of you know, sort of simulate what this is doing in terms of this. You know, if you imagine you can walk around these directed edges, then you'd kind of be able feel like you're in a structure that looks like this red one here. Um so, I think that directed graphs are actually pretty close to the heart of mathematics, actually. so, you know, if you have this idea of directed graphs, then you have the idea that well, when you've got two arrows that are head to tail, there's some kind of a extra arrow that's considered to be the sort of composition of these two, like that. So, if this is F and this is G, then you can call this uh maybe uh G after F. Um so, if you add this idea of composition to this idea of directed graphs, you get categories, basically. So, um you know, directed graphs can go into categories, but I think they're in a sense um something very, very basic. Maybe not the most basic thing, but there's something very, very fundamental, I think, about this idea of just having ordered dots and seeing which things are connected to which other things. &gt;&gt; Um I mean, it also yeah, I'll just say for people that know, you know, if you think about a matrix full of non-negative integers, you can think of an entry of that matrix as telling you how many directed links you have from one node to another. So, you know, in a sense, um this is also connected with a lot of uh linear algebra and things like this. So, the idea of graphical linear algebra we imagine that the information always flows from the left to the right, and we can draw these wires, and then like to get a flavor of it, basically we have this kind of node that we can draw that's like a copy. So, this sort of copies. And we also have this kind of white node, which adds the inputs. And then we can just combine these things together and see what they do. And this is basically what graphical linear algebra is about. So, you could have an input, you might copy it, and then you might add these two copies together again. So, if you put a three in, and you get a three there and a three there, and then you get a six out. But you might also have a system like this, where you take two inputs, and then you copy the first one, and then maybe you use that copy as outputs, and then you can add these two together. Okay? So, what does this one do? Well, let's see, okay? So, what if we put in a couple of numbers, like let's say a one and a two. Then we're going to get a one here and a one here. And then this is going to be 2 + 1, uh and then the one comes out here. And so, basically what happens here is we take in our two inputs, and then out here we're going to get the sum of those two inputs, and down here we're going to get the first input. So, what this actually is is really a matrix, actually. So, um you know, this is Basically, you can think of this is like a 2 by 2 matrix. um what you can basically do is replace linear algebra with these kind of expressions and then when you sort of multiply matrices and all these things that most people work out completely algebraically, well, you can draw pictures for all of it. Even better, you can actually really get underneath the arithmetic itself. I find this absolutely beautiful. So, you'll notice that I've always sort of drawn these diagrams and then I've been writing numbers on the wires to indicate the sort of example of how this runs. Now, you know, instead of writing um one and two, I mean, I could write um X and Y and we think of X and Y as these sort of variables and we can think about things like that. So, we put in an X here and a Y here and then we get an X here and an X here and then we get this is going to be X plus Y and this is going to be X. So, this is like a more general version of what I just did. Um, where we use these variables instead of numbers and then using this kind of thing, you can see, okay, I can see the algebra going on here, you know. Um, and indeed, basically, this is a complete You can completely substitute linear algebra for these diagrams, but these diagrams are not just some ad hoc um sort of thing that someone cooked up and they're like, okay, yeah, we can draw these pictures and it seems to match reality. The theory goes very deep, okay? These are string diagrams that there's a very, very uh well-developed theory about how these relate to things called uh symmetric monoidal categories. And yeah, if you have a look at the graphical linear algebra.net, that blog, they explain graphical linear algebra from the beginning, um you know, for anybody to follow and yeah, I highly recommend it because it's I think it's a really, really transformative uh kind of understanding that one can gain from this. Okay, so what's the other big one? So, I'm a little bit reluctant to talk about this because I don't think it's very well developed, but I think it could be just I think it could completely revolutionize the future actually. Uh but, you know, maybe I'm completely wrong here. So, take this with a fist of salt, but I mean, the other one is something called box arithmetic. &gt;&gt; [sighs and gasps] &gt;&gt; what is box arithmetic? Well, um people who follow my channel quite a lot will know I'm quite fond of the work of Norman Wildberger and I was quite fond of his work on dynamics on graphs, which basically allows us to look at those graphs that I was talking about before, and then we can think, "Okay, what if the nodes on those graphs, the vertices, have like every vertex has like a number attached to it, and then those numbers change over time according to some rule." It's called the mutation game. Um and basically, if you evolve that kind of thing, um then it's very interesting, right? You can see connections with all sorts of things involving, you know, geometry and mathematical physics. And essentially, Wildberger found this very simple kind of game that you can play on a graph. It's called a game. I mean, it's really a way of you know, you have like a a graph with some numbers on it, and then there's different ways that you can change it, and you can think about all the different ways that things could could evolve. And if you do that, then it's basically a back door into, well, all of these like exceptional structures in math a lot of these exceptional structures in mathematics and really beautiful stuff. Um so that's this idea of this sort of mutation game. Now I'm not really sure why I'm talking about the mutation game because that's not what I'm talking about here. I guess I'm just trying to I'm just trying to illustrate why I'm so um why I have so much respect for Norman Wildberger's stuff in general and why when he started saying that he has a new approach to mathematics from the ground up called box arithmetic, I gave it the I gave it some time. Um so I'm going to put links to I mean I've made some videos involving the mutation game and E8 and things like this I'll also put a link to Norman Wildberger's um course on box But it's very very interesting in my opinion. I really do think it's it could be the beginning of a a massive revolution and indeed well, I'll come back to I wanted to say something else but I'll I'll say that later. Um okay, so what's box arithmetic about? you know, if if um it's a it's a it's a new foundation to mathematics essentially or a attempt to building one. Maybe it's a it's a half-built one, right? Because there's not that many people working on it yet. There's not that many people aware of it yet and I find it actually really interesting sort of seeing who reacts to this in different ways um because it I think it has the potential to be quite disruptive actually. Um and you know, there's a part of me that I've spent all this time learning category theory and basically stuff that's based on set theory. Okay? So set theory. Now, I have never really been to I've never really been too enthused by um a sort of Zermelo-Fraenkel um approach to foundations of of maths via set theory. I I prefer I mean, if you have a look at my foundations of maths thing, I prefer a sort of type theory-based approach, you know, using uh Martin basically Well, you could call it Is it Martin-Löf um thing, but you know, dependent type theory basically, I think is is a nice way to look at things, but um I think that it's kind of difficult to get away from these set theoretic foundations. I mean, I'm not like a expert in foundations of mathematics, but I remember there's this homotopy type theory book that's available free online, which I I spent I spent some time reading that about 5 or 6 years ago. And um I think even in there they say that sort of implicitly behind the scenes there's set theoretic assumptions, you know. And I'm not I'm not um you know, so maybe it's difficult to get away from this as a foundation. but there's as as Norman Wildberger says, there's there's there's some issues here. I mean, one of the main ones, if if you're interested in arithmetic, let's say, cuz you know, it's one thing trying to make some foundations that are just going to be able to, you know, in one wave of the hand, they're going to be able to reproduce everything in mathematics, but I do agree with with with with Norman about this this I think we have a we have a problem actually in in pure mathematics. And I mean, if you have a look at my uh uh video What is a manifold, right? Uh for example. I mean, in that video, I got so frustrated with, you know, why is the definition of manifold so complicated that I thought, "Okay, I'm going to make a video. I'm going to go through every every kind of um you know, from topological space um all the way to sort of topological manifold, smooth manifold, all that kind of stuff. And I'm going to explain all the definitions, and that way I'll know what a manifold is." And so, I tried to do that. But, as Norman says, there's just infinities stacked on infinity stacked on infinities. The way that a lot of people think about pure mathematics, things like real analysis and where we have these kind of continuous spaces people just have become completely blasé about having infinities everywhere. And I mean, I I feel like if you look at, for example, measure theory is, in my opinion, one of the kind of worst offenders of this that it's I I find it hard to even read a couple of pages about measure theory and like feel like I understand what what they're talking about. Because, you know, when they say, "Okay, uh infinite decimals or Cauchy sequences or these kind of things." It's like, "Well, I can't fit that one of those in my head, you know? I don't know what it even looks like, even one example of this infinite thing." Because what's it mean for it to go on forever and all this kind of stuff? And I know I know it's it's not as I think maybe some people go too far with the animosity towards this approach cuz I'm sure there's there's value in it. And if people are willing to sort of um tolerate these infinities and work with them, they can make a lot of progress. And heck, I mean, I with category theory, I I I would I would not want to take down all my category theory for beginners course because it's involving infinities, but to me, it just doesn't feel good to try to understand the subject when the basic examples are things that I can't write down or really get into my head and I feel like, well, this is based on some kind of weird metaphysical assumptions that I can't actually verify. And that's kind of that's all that's one of reasons I'm so into math is so that I, you know, to avoid stuff like that when possible. And the thing is, it is possible to avoid a lot of these infinities or to approach things in different ways. Now, I mean, for example, although I don't consider this necessarily a good example, but there's things like synthetic differential geometry, you know, which gives one a way to think about these continuous structures. I mean, again, it's axiomatic and again, there's some there's there's nebulous aspects to it and it's highly abstract. Um but it doesn't it feels to me like it it it doesn't um have to trudge through as much mud as the current approach to manifolds involving all of, you know, so many of these like ideas of limit points and um a- atlases and all of this kind of stuff, um which yeah, I Anyway, anyway. Um so, yeah, there there might be some issues with with set theory, okay. So, so what? I mean, what what are we going to do about it? I mean, there's always been issues with the foundations of of mathematics, right? Ever since probably before, but, you know, people said, "Okay, if you have a right angle triangle, um then this length here is going to be the square root of two, and you can't write that as a fraction, right? where these are whole numbers. So, this was a sort of, um, catastrophic event really in the foundations of mathematics uh a few thousand years ago, and arguably we never really recovered from it, right? Because we don't like this idea that we can't write the square root of two, and so we make up this idea of real numbers, and it's, well, anyway. Um, so things like this I think it's been papered over currently, and it's a reason to rethink mathematics maybe, but I'm just, I don't know. At this point I feel like I'm parroting Wildberger a little bit, I suppose this is part of what I do on this channel, but hopefully I'm saying a few things that are a bit, you know, trying to sort of synthesize these ideas a little bit. so what is box arithmetic about? Well, the idea is that instead of having the idea of sets as fundamental, we have the idea of multisets. Multisets. So, what is a multiset? A multiset is like a set, so here's a set. Um, it's got apple strawberry, I'm not allowed to have two apples in this set, right? I'm only allowed to have at most one copy of any elements in a set. But in a multiset, that restriction is dropped. So, you can have a multiset that has two apples and one strawberry. And so, a multiset is like just like a set, except you're allowed multiple copies of the same thing. So, um, here's another multiset. 3 3 4 4 1. So, the order doesn't matter, but we're allowed to have multiple copies of the same element. Okay. So, basically, the idea is that multisets could serve as a foundation for mathematics. And people will say, "Okay, yes, but let's start with sets. Let's define what multisets are, and then you can say whatever you want." I mean, that's one possible approach, but the claim is that if you actually take multisets to be the fundamental objects in mathematics, the whole of mathematics just unfolds very, very naturally. And what is a very disruptive um idea is that with a little bit of a twist, the things that come out of this, it's like we get we get [clears throat] we get the arithmetic of integers, and we get the theory of polynomials, and multinomials, and things going on like this, just coming out of the structure completely naturally with absolutely no um no tinkering at all. Actually, no axioms. It's not like I mean, honestly, if you look at how arithmetic is currently defined in terms of set theory, it's quite tortured, actually, you know. This idea that, well, we have the empty set, and then the set containing the empty set is like one, and then the set containing the set containing that is like two, you know? This kind of thing. I think I'm not sure if I'm getting this right, but well, let's if you define um numbers like this, it's, you know, when you start talking about like 1 + 2 = 3 and all this kind of stuff. It's quite tortured actually because from the very beginning we're just like, "Okay, we need to have distinct things and we'll just look at all of the operations that we can do." Well, there aren't many operations we can do if we start with the idea of empty sets and we can take subsets and this is this sort of von Neumann universe approach to mathematics. and it's a bit tortured because well, I mean you probably don't think so, but you probably will if you take in box arithmetic properly because once you see that, you'll be like, "Oh my god, like that's so much easier." So, what's the idea of this box arithmetic then? Um Oh, yeah, so I'm going to tell you that. But, the other thing I wanted to say is that this isn't just a nice new approach to foundations of maths, it's crazy because it's so natural that it basically gives us like about eight times as much structure as we currently have. So, if you think about maths is like, you know, it's like a point here, it's like the beginning and then it sort of expands out and this is, you know, this would be like your original assumptions or whatever and then you're looking at your theorems and if this is what modern maths is currently, I'd say box arithmetic is probably more more like kind of this kind of thing where we've got a place to start, but the amount of stuff that we discover um instantly is you know, immediately there's loads of extra stuff there that we didn't expect to be there and I think if you're interested in things like mathematical physics, like this is really worth paying attention to because it's it's actually in my opinion, it's probably a bit What what's the word? What do people say? They say um the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics, right? Or the unreasonable effectiveness of polynomial functions. I think box arithmetic is unreasonably effective within mathematics as well. Um so, okay. Enough about building up the drum roll. Let's see what this actually is. So, what is box arithmetic? Well, you start with the idea of an empty set, and we just draw that as box. So, it's a box with nothing in it. Okay? Um And it's kind of like the von Neumann approach, we can then consider a box with a box in it. And this is our number one. Okay? So, our number zero, we can think of it like just an empty box. And then this is a box containing an empty box. Now, what does a box mean? It means a multi-set. And that means that we can also have a box that contains two boxes. And that's what we consider to be like the number two. Because we're allowed to have multiple copies of things. Um and then we have this idea that we can add together. So, so more generally then we can draw things like this, okay? So, we can have we can have like okay, we've got a box in a box there, and we've got two copies of that, and then we've got another box there, and another box there. And this is another sort of multi-set, and it's it has a similar flavor to this sort of von Neumann approach where we're looking we sort of start with the empty set and think about different things that we can build from that using like subsets and stuff, but we're allowed multiplicities. then you also have this idea that if you have like a box with some things in it, and another box with some things in it, then you can add them together. Okay? And what does that mean? Well, basically, you get a new box, and then you empty all the from inside this into here, and you empty all the stuff from inside this into here. That's all you do. You just put it all together. So, we've got this thing from here, and then the stuff from here. And so now, with So, this is sort of This is like This is equal to this plus this. Okay? So, now we can write things like 3 = 1 + 2. Okay? How do we get this? Well, you know, let's let's work it out. So, here's one. We're going to add that to two. So, we take the stuff in here and the stuff in here, and we put them into this box. And then we have this one with sort of three zeros in and this is like the number three. I already think it's lovely that we get arithmetic like this, but it goes absolutely crazy when uh we add a few more things. Okay? I'm not going to get into that yet. Let me just show you This is a little bit less crazy, but it's still pretty fun. is this idea that we can also have polynomials. Okay? So, um basically, I was talking before about things like this, right? This expression, x + 1. So, for us, x We don't have to worry about, oh, it's a variable, and what is a variable? And I think that this is actually one of the massive weak points in math education. I think that there's very few people that can explain what a variable is. Um probably myself included, and yet we um we base our um whole maths stuff or base a lot of maths on that, and I think it's Yeah, I think there's a lot of people who are probably so mathematically inclined that they have a difficulty allowing these definitions in in a funny kind of way. Anyway, so for us, one is this. So zero is just a box. One is a box in a box. Two is two boxes in a box, etc. And then X is a box containing one. That's what X is. Like what I mean by X, I mean the idea of a variable. Okay? So we're going to replace the idea of variable with this. And what is this? Well, we know that one is that, so if we expand it out, we've just replaced that number one here with what one is equal to. So we get this idea of a box in a box in a box. And that's what X is. And then what about X squared? Well, that's just a box containing the number two. So that's like this. Okay? And then, you know, when we talk about these expressions like before, I was talking about this 1 + X + X squared. Well, we can just work that out, okay? So we have one. Okay, where's one? There it is. So we want this plus X, which is here. plus X squared. Okay, so we want to add these things together, so we just make a new box, and we just put the contents of all of these into it. So this this picture, I mean don't you find this picture easy to understand than this expression I I showed you. Um anyway, where it gets absolutely crazy though. I mean this is the part that really makes me sort of Yeah, it really makes me very excited is that there's a way to introduce um negative numbers into this. Basically using the idea of antimatter or something akin to the idea of antimatter. So basically the idea is that if you have a box you have a box in a box, right? And that's like one. But you can also have let's say as a in addition to having boxes, we can also have what we'll call anti-boxes. let's draw the anti-boxes with dashed boundaries. And then the idea is that they're kind of like antimatter. And so if you have a box and an anti-box then they kind of can annihilate. And so this is the same as an empty box. And so now if you define minus one to be a sort of box containing an anti-box well then this has the feature that if you sort of do minus one plus one then you're going to get zero or you're going to get a sort of empty box if you like. And more generally, um if we have like any stuff inside here, like let's just write like a capital X. This could be any kind of multi set. If we have any kind of multi set here, then again these kind of things annihilate. We'll have that as a sort of rule. And if you assume this, you get So, we've gone from this sort of arithmetic where we have integer we have non-negative integers, you know, non-negative whole number 0 1 2 3 and so on. And then we have these sort of polynomials that we can build up as I tried to illustrate. But now, um with this kind of anti-box stuff, we have this idea of negative numbers. Now, I've got to say, I'm a little bit I'm a little bit um concerned. I'm not sure that approach to box arithmetic is logically consistent. Um not to say that I think it's not, but I I I haven't seen it proved that if we introduce the sort of anti-boxes in the in the way that Norman is, it doesn't seem like it's been proved that it is consistent and all the rest of it. So, there's a part of me that's a bit reluctant to make videos about this kind of thing, which is really kind of like the wild west. But it really is like the wild west. I mean, people going over to some new continent and finding gold mines and things like this because what's so crazy, and I'm not going to talk about it much here. I'd love to make another video about it when I've understood it more, but what's actually crazy is how much stuff you get by assuming that these anti-boxes exist. Cuz you don't just get like the standard arithmetic and polynomials and things like this. And you can look at it like that. And um Norman goes quite far with this. He goes all the way thinking about things like um zeta functions and number theory and stuff like that. um you can also just start tinkering around at the level of the foundations of the thing. And with these boxes and anti-boxes, you just get some crazy stuff coming out that to be quite honest, is almost a bit scary because it's like oh, we didn't really understand almost anything about how &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; maths works over and there's like you can have like anti-things that are combining to make ordinary things. And it it makes you wonder about physics in a weird kind of way. It's like did we you know, if it So, I I don't know. I I have a tendency to get a bit carried away with things, but I kind of think that we might look back see this box arithmetic or something that is close to it as as like a real replacement for a lot of things in ordinary maths. Now, is box arithmetic a new idea? I I don't know. I'm not you know, I I'm not that I don't read that much um about stuff, but I have got this book. higher um Operads Higher Categories by Liane Sterling and um I mean, I'll show you a lovely It's a lovely book is this. It's very sort of category theoretic and you know, there are these ideas of operads and multi-categories. Here's a picture I quite like. Um the Swiss cheese. Um but you know, or there's is it Plato's heaven? It's another one discussed here, but you know, these idea of operads and these kind of nested structures where we're putting boxes inside of the boxes, they have been studied before in different ways. Sort of other ways that people think of them in terms of tree structures and so on. So, you can sort of um make a kind of tree which is a kind of undirected graph again, you know. So, we'll have the outer box as a sort of node and uh it's got three children because there are three things that are contained in it. And this one doesn't have anything contained in it. This one has another child cuz it's a box in a box. And this one has two children. Um and so this is a sort of tree that corresponds to this. And then you can have like trees with black or white nodes. Uh I mean they're really sort of rooted trees in a way cuz the outer box is special. yeah. like there's definitely connections here with with operads and things. But I I kind of feel like yeah, just saying, "Oh, some category theorist um wrote down, you know, some expression and this is like one of the special cases." That doesn't really mean that people discovered this, right? It's kind of like when people first flew over the Amazon rainforest, they probably you know, glimpsed lots of trees of species that were know that were not identified. But that's not the same thing as going down into the ground level of the rainforest and actually going up to the trees and studying them carefully and being like, "Okay, this is a new species of tree and we know what it is." You know, there's a big difference between this kind of maths from a helicopter versus like maths where you actually, you know, really sort of explore and hunt for things. Not using all of this fancy technology that we have from things like category theory, but actually kind of rolling up our sleeves and being like, "Well, this is something new and I'm not going to assume that my old methods are going to um make progress with this." And there's something maybe I'm a bit of a a rebel, but there's something about that I really love. I really love the idea that people who are not necessarily formally trained in the same things can come along and do things that other people never saw before. And I think that box arithmetic is a great like or it's a potential thing where stuff like that can happen. Um but again, take it with a fist of salt because I'm a bit of a Norman Wildberger fanboy, I suppose. Um there are definitely people that I know, category theorists and things that would sort of look down their nose at things like that and say that, you know, there's much more uh formal ways or or whatever. And I don't really know who to you know, everyone knows stuff that other people don't, right? Um anyway, um so that's a little bit of um what I wanted to say. And yeah, like please uh in the comments, if there are other kind of approaches to maths that you feel like have this kind of potential, you know, to I mean, I'm really interested in these kind of maths that could potentially just be a complete replacement for a lot of the kind of algebraic approach now. And it's not because I hate algebra. What I hate is that there's so many people who have got really amazing ideas that are currently locked out of a lot of maths because it's so encoded in algebra. And I just really want to I really would like I would really like it if people who know about these graphical approaches and things would sort of step back a little bit from their um their fancy new discoveries and spend a bit more time trying to make it easier for the rest of us. Because I think in the in the long run, the the payoffs from that will be enormous.
